>> David: Fasten
your seatbelts.
Is your car dealership
ripping you off?
>> 1,200-dollar service
they were recommending.
None of which was needed.
>> David: We're undercover.
>> You guys are
missing everything.
Tire rotation, brake inspection.
>> Again, overselling.
>> David: High-pressure tactics.
>> I felt like he was
trying to scare me.
>> David: Plus, insider secrets.
>> You have to up-sell them.
They come in for an oil change,
you're up-selling somebody.
>> David: I'm just trying to get
to the bottom of why you're
recommending service that
isn't required on a vehicle.
>> David: This is
your Marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: At some point,
we all do this.
>> Hi, I want to
drop my car off.
>> David: But when
you bring your car
to the dealership for service...
>> David: How do you know
what they recommend...
>> David: ..is what's
really needed?
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: To find out we're
recruiting Jessica Celsie.
>> You don't really know
who to trust when it comes to
getting your car fixed.
>> David: With her newly
purchased 2008 Honda Civic.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: This is our bait car.
First, we ask Jessica
to bring it to this garage
for a pre-inspection by licensed
mechanic Mark Whinton.
>> Hi nice to meet you.
>> Nice to meet you.
Have you had any
issues with it at all?
Is there any lights coming on?
>> Nope, nothing.
>> Any rattles?
>> Nope, no rattles.
>> None whatsoever?
So it's completely dependable?
It's starting?
It's running all right?
>> Yes.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: After taking
it for a test drive, he begins.
Once an instructor, Whinton is
now a vehicle safety advocate.
The verdict?
>> Change the wiper blades,
rotate the tires.
Ummm, that should be it.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Jessica's ready
to check out what this
Toronto Honda
dealership recommends.
>> Well, based on my past
experience with dealerships,
ummm, you know,
i have a feeling
they're going to
try and up-sell me.
>> David: And Jessica's
not alone.
We're hearing similar concerns
about up-selling at dealerships
from across the country.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Including
from Cathy Knight...
>> This looks like the
road our house is on.
It would be there but--
>> No, that's the
way to the park.
>> David: Cathy likes to take
her grandson, Joe, around Ottawa
in her 2011 Ford Fusion.
>> There's the park.
See, Joe?
We just passed it.
>> David: When her car
needs to be serviced,
she and her husband Craig always
take it back to the dealership.
>> David: Why is it important
for you to go to the dealership
to do your maintenance?
>> They know the car best, and
i just have confidence in them.
>> You develop a relationship,
you depend on them to give you
advice, when they give
you advice, you take it.
>> David: Last fall, Cathy
needed her snow tires put on.
So Craig makes an appointment
online with their dealership.
But get this, before
even inspecting her car,
he gets an email back,
telling him it's also due for
factory required maintenance.
>> And it was changing the spark
plugs and the intake manifold
gasket and changing
the transmission fluid,
the PCV valve.
And holy cow,
$1200 bucks worth of stuff?
i was just going to get the snow
tires put on and an oil change.
>> David: Time to
get a second opinion.
>> Cars today,
absolutely, unequivocally,
require less service.
>> David: So, how do i know,
when i go to the dealership,
what maintenance i really need?
>> Oh, that's easy.
You go to your car.
>> David: Yup.
Pull out your owner's manual.
>> You take out the owner's
manual and right here is the
required maintenance schedule.
In it will be exactly
what needs to be changed,
what exactly needs
to be inspected.
These people
designed and built the car.
They are the source of
information when it comes to
maintaining the car.
>> David: What the manufacturer
suggests in the owner's manual
for maintenance and
what the dealer suggests
are two different things?
>> In most cases,
yes that's true.
They'll tell you that you
need more maintenance
than your car actually needs.
In some cases, some
maintenance procedures
your car doesn't require at all.
>> David: So, what about that
list of what Cathy's dealership
says she needs?
>> PCV valve, I wouldn't
bother changing it.
It's a lifetime product now.
The spark plugs in this car,
according to the owner's manual,
is good for 160,000 kilometers.
She is nowhere near that.
Change the automatic
transmission fluid, no.
>> David: That's a big list and
you just said no to a lot of it.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> David: So what's going on?
>> Well what's going on here is
the service advisor is trying to
sell this woman a lot
more work than she needs.
>> David: Back in Ottawa,
Craig decides they'll stick to
what's recommended
in the owner's manual.
But the dealership pushes
back, telling him the manual
is describing "normal"
driving conditions.
Here in Ottawa, we have
"special" driving conditions,
due to the harsh weather.
>> The owner's manual
says nothing at all about
special conditions about Ottawa
or any other particular city
or geographic area or country,
and doesn't say anything
about the cold weather.
it doesn't.
>> David: But it's too
late for Cathy and Craig.
Did you do the spark plugs?
>> I did, eventually,
several months later.
>> David: How do you
feel about that now?
>> That i was dumb,
that i got taken in.
>> David: 'Cause this
says, right here,
in the thing that's in
your car, 160,000 kilometers.
>> Yeah, that's another
two or three years of driving.
In spite of knowing
better, i still did it.
>> David: Because?
>> Because they
recommend it and they sort of
plant that little seed of
doubt, and you think,
well, maybe they DO know
what they're talking about.
>> David: Dealerships
in Canada can make, on average,
only about $1000 to $2500
on each new car sale.
So their service centres have
become important money makers.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Back on
our undercover test,
Jessica Celsie checks
in at Parkway Honda.
>> Okay.
>> Okay, thank you.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: A couple hours later,
Jessica gets a phone call
from an Assistant Service
Manager at Parkway Honda.
>> Okay.
>> Wow.
Is that something
that I can think about?
>> Okay, thank you.
>> Bye.
>> Wow.
>> David: 621 bucks
to replace her rear brakes?
They also recommend a $112
for a brake fluid flush.
>> If she changes them now,
she'd be changing them
a bit early.
She's got 40% left.
And that might take
another six months.
She might get a year out of
it, depending on her driving.
>> And I didn't notice
anything driving the car.
>> I didn't either.
When I had the drums
off, everything looked
perfectly normal
for that age of break.
>> David: But there's
something critical the dealer
is not mentioning.
The largest recall
in automotive history.
Metal fragments from the
exploding ammonium nitrate
capsule inside Takata airbags
have killed at least 14 people.
Hurt more than 180, including
a metal shard that went through
this woman's face in 2013, while
she was driving her Honda Civic.
>> I've taken the VIN off
your car and run it through
the Honda system.
Your car has a passenger side
airbag that's made by Takata...
>>Wow.
>>: ..that needs to be changed.
>>Wow!
So why wouldn't they have
mentioned that to me?
He basically said he would
be doing everything short of
a safety on it, which, in my
mind, should include an airbag.
>> That is the
number one safety problem
facing your car right now.
>> Right.
>> It's not rear brakes.
it's the airbag recall.
>> And so, for him
not to mention that,
is unbelievable to me.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Jessica heads
back to pick up her car.
Maybe the tell her
about the recall in person.
The same Assistant Service
Manager from the phone call
hands her the results
of their inspection.
But, under any
outstanding recalls, incredibly,
it's checked "no".
Jessica gives him
another chance to own up.
>> In the first three or four
times I asked him if there was
anything wrong with the
car or if it had any other
safety concerns other than
the brakes, he said no.
>> David: But then,
without having to look it up...
>> He finally said at the end,
"Oh, yeah, I think
there's a recall,"
and then he made mention that
he didn't have the part
and he'd have to book
a later date for me.
That just makes me sick.
because I'm now driving a car
that's unsafe to both
me and my passengers.
>> David: We contact this
Assistant Service Manager for
an explanation,
but get no reply.
Why would a dealership
not tell a customer about this?
>> The dealership has
this business relationship
that's special, under contract,
with the manufacturing facility.
In that agreement, they have to
do work at a much-reduced rate.
>> David: Do you think that
ever influences dealerships
telling people about recalls?
>> Absolutely.
>> David: So did it
influence Parkway Honda?
For weeks, we've been asking
Parkway Honda to come on camera
to explain why they've been
recommending Jessica get service
she doesn't need but not
telling her about the service
that she DOES need.
Well, they've told us
they're gonna do an
internal investigation
but they will not
talk to us on camera.
That's what they've said.
Let's go chat with them.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Service Manager
Ara Pashayan
stops me at the door.
>> You're not allowed
in with a cameras.
This is private property.
We'd ask that you leave.
>> David: Okay, but you have
an answer about why she's
not being told about the recall?
>> Please, leave.
You were not allowed here
but you guys are showing up.
>> David: But it's still...
it's, you know,
that's not an answer to the
question about why she is
not being told about a recall.
>> Thank you.
>> David: It's still
not an answer.
>> We please ask
that you leave.
>> David: The up-sell continues.
>> That's just funny.
That's, like, totally made-up.
>> David: This is
your Marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: The real deal
on dealerships.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: We're heading
undercover again,
testing the advice you get
at dealership service centres.
Bait car number two,
a 2013 Jeep Wrangler.
The owner, Eric, works for us.
And for months, he's been
getting e-mails, telling him to
bring the Jeep in for service.
So we ask him to make
an appointment here at
Toronto Chrysler Dodge Jeep Ram.
>> Hello.
>> Good morning.
>> David: What will this
service advisor recommend?
>> David: But check it
Eric's owner's manual.
It says it can be up to 16,000
kilometres or 12 months before
the change oil message appears.
There is no message,
and it's only been eight months
and just over 2,000 kilometres
since Eric's last oil change.
>> David: Her assessment
isn't over yet.
It'll take a couple hours
for their technician
to do an inspection.
In the meantime, we want to
get some inside knowledge
so we track down
a former Service Advisor,
willing to share trade secrets.
>> When you're
a Service Advisor,
you are a salesperson.
This is how you
make your living, right?
So you have to up-sell them.
They come in for an oil change,
you're up-selling somebody.
>> David: Lucas Leung worked at
six different dealerships.
>> We present it, in a way,
and let them know that
this is what you should do.
If you don't do it,
what's gonna happen.
>> David: I'm a
customer coming in.
What you say to me,
right out of the gate?
>> Hey, so, I see that you're
here for an oil change today.
You're at 150,000
kilometres, actually,
and you're due for a timing belt
as well as a coolant flush.
You can do it, it's up to you.
But if you don't do it, what
happens is the belt might
wear out and, when
it wears out, you know,
like, this could cause
overheating of the engine
or cause even more
problems down the road.
>> David: So, was there ever
something in the dealership that
looked different from what
the owner's manual said
in terms of a schedule?
>> They would have a
little board that shows you
what needs to be done what
kilometres but then, there are
things on the side
that they do recommend...
that's suggested.
You know,
recommended but not necessary.
For example, power steering
flush, throttle body service,
transmission flush.
You accumulate an X-amount of
numbers each month and you
get paid based on that.
>> David: Meanwhile,
Toronto Chrysler's inspection
is complete.
>> Not acceptable?
>> David: We show the
footage to Mark Whinton.
>> The truth of the matter is,
you're gonna void your warranty
if you don't follow Chrysler's
scheduled maintenance advice,
not hers.
>> This person saying, you know,
you need to change your oil
every three months.
No, this goes against
what Chrysler says to do
with its own product.
>> David: The Service
Advisor lists their
other recommendations.
>> David: Really?
She doesn't know we're
also getting Mark Whinton
to do his own inspection
of the Wrangler.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: So, does
he need brakes?
>> I wouldn't do that.
I would wait
another year or two.
Given how much this
car is being driven,
it makes no noise,
the brakes have full power.
Are they worn down?
Yeah, they're
about half worn down.
But the owner's gonna
get another, you know,
year or two out of this.
No problem.
>> David: The service
advisor's not finished.
>> I just inspected this car.
It does not need an alignment.
The air filter doesn't need
to be replaced once a year,
according to the
maintenance schedule.
Again, overselling.
There's a conflict of
interest in this business,
and it's kind of hidden.
People do not know they
work on commission, but they do.
>> I would say 90%
of these dealerships
do work by commission.
>> David: How much of
your salary could end up
being on commission?
>> More than 50%.
>> David: More than 50%?
>> David: Really?
>> At one of the dealerships
I worked for, I was at
a 100% on commission.
>> David: Was that an incentive
to sell something that either
wasn't necessary or wasn't
necessary at that moment?
>> Yes, I would
definitely say so.
Being on 100% commission,
I was very nervous, like,
every day because
you don't know
how much you're gonna be making.
Some customers may not
necessarily need it right away
but they're obligated to do it
because of how I advise it,
how I put it on the table.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Back at
the dealership...
>> David: Well, we checked
the spark plugs in the
owner's manual and it says
Eric's don't need to be changed
for another 107,000
kilometres or six more years!
>> You do not
recommend flushing it.
And, as far as this other stuff,
it might get tighter,
the steering?
That's a great one.
I mean, that's just funny.
That's, like, totally made-up.
>> Okay.
>> David: We do have questions.
We call and e-mail but this
Service Advisor does not reply.
We also contact the dealership.
But getting answers from
Toronto Chrysler Jeep Dodge Ram?
That's been the tricky part.
So we're gonna pay them
a visit, ask in person.
General Manager Dave Dodds.
Hey, how are you?
>> Good, how are you?
>> David: Good, I'm David
with CBC Marketplace.
>> David, I'm sorry,
but this is private property
and I'm afraid I'm gonna
have to ask you to go.
>> David: I can go but I'm
trying to get to the bottom of
why you're recommending
service that isn't required
on a vehicle.
>> Please, please, please.
>> David: Or why you're
recommending service
more frequently than
the manufacturer?
Do you have a sense on that?
Why you're recommending
that service that often?
Do your Service Advisors
work on commission?
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: The dealership
is owned by Auto Canada,
based here in Edmonton.
With 65 franchises across
the country, it's one of the
largest auto dealer
groups in Canada.
We do some digging and find
out, so far this year, they have
made more on service
than they have on selling
new and used cars combined!
Well, we ask for some more
information, they won't come
on camera, but the
president of Auto Canada
writes to us and says he
"applauds the manufacturer's
maintenance schedule,"
without explaining why his
dealership isn't using it.
>> David: Will the
government crack down?
>> If someone is found guilty,
the penalty can range from
a fine to
jail time, potentially.
>> David: This is
your Marketplace.
Get more Marketplace.
Sign up for our
weekly newsletter
at CBC.ca/marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: This is
your Marketplace.
Caught on camera.
>> My understanding was
I was supposed to bring it in
for regular maintenance.
>> David: Aggressive up-selling.
>> David: Misleading
inspections.
>> Had I not pressed him several
times, he wouldn't have even
mentioned the recall.
>> David: If this happens, is
there anybody protecting you?
To find out, I head to
Ontario's watchdog.
The Ministry Of Government
And Consumer Services.
Hey, Harry, I'm David with CBC.
>> Nice to meet you.
>> David: Yeah, get to meet you.
Spokesperson Harry Malhi.
What is the law say about
a repair shop telling you you
need to do something
before you need to do it
or you don't even
need to do it at all?
>> Repair shops cannot offer
services that aren't needed.
>> David: Does that
mean it's against the law?
>> It could be in violation of
the Consumer Protection Act.
They can't mislead you if it's
a service that's not needed.
They can't be like, "This is
needed to fix your car."
>> David: What is the range
of your power to penalize?
>> If someone is found guilty,
the penalty can range from a
fine to jail time, potentially.
>> David: It can
go all that way?
>> Yes.
>> David: A dealership
would say,
"This is a work that
you need to do,"
and then we would go to
experts and they would say,
"No, it doesn't
need to be done.
"Your brakes can last for
months or maybe another year
"before they
need to be changed."
>> So in those cases,
we want those consumers
to reach out to us.
If there was a violation,
we want to know
so we can do something about it.
And we can find any bad
actors that may be out there.
So we need the help of
consumers to make us aware.
>> David: You know, I think,
when I go and buy a car,
I am aware that the
salesperson makes a commission.
That's how they
make their money.
I think a lot of people would
be surprised to learn that
many service advisors,
people you come and meet,
they, too, are on commission
and that they are essentially
incentivized to sell you more.
>> We want to make
consumers aware that
they have those rights.
They need to know that when
they go to these technicians,
whether they get a
commission or not,
they can't offer you
services you don't need.
And we can look into that.
If they feel like some--
their rights were violated.
>> I have worked for brands that
focuses on customer service,
like 100% customer service.
No, you don't need to really
sell, sell, sell, sell, sell.
I mean, like, it's good.
>> David: So there is
good guys out there?
>> Yes.
Oh, absolutely.
I have worked with amazing
companies out there.
>> David: So what can
you do to prepare if
you're going into
the dealership?
>> Before you go, look at
the mileage on your car,
see how many kilometres
are on it, then have a look
at the owners manual,
go to the maintenance
section and see what's
required at that mileage,
or slightly before.
Somewhere near that
mileage or months,
and once you know what that is,
go right to that service advisor
and say, "I want
these things done."
>> David: And what
if they push back?
>> Well, if they push back,
you walk out the door.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Advice
Jessica Celsie could use.
Since our first bait car test,
she's been getting notices in
the mail from Parkway Honda.
>> That I needed
spark plugs, shocks,
struts, things like that.
Even though my car
was just there and
they just inspected it.
>> David: But nothing
about the Takata airbag.
>> If it wasn't for Marketplace,
I would not have known
there was a recall on my car.
>> David: Today, she's bringing
it to a totally different
Honda dealership, to finally
get that airbag replaced.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> It's done.
Finally, what a relief!
I've been so stressed out
about having people in my car,
having passengers, like,
I didn't realize how much
it was bothering me
driving in traffic until now
that it is finally done.
My car is safe.
Yay!
[ ♪♪ ]
>> We're inside
farmers markets.
>> People at the markets
don't know what they're
buying that food and
they're being lied to.
>> Are you really buying
direct from the farm?
We follow the trail.
Consumers are paying a
premium for your product
because they think
that you grew it.
Are you ripping people off?
[ ♪♪ ]